CHART AND NAUTICAL PUBLICATION REGULATIONS
Chart and Nautical Publication Regulations recommends that pleasure craft operators have on board Nautical Charts for the area to be navigated. A pleasure craft (not propelled by oars) should have on board with respect to the area, in which the craft is navigated, the most recent editions of:

largest scale charts;
required publications;
required documents.
An open body of water may seem inviting, but remember that there are no clearly marked traffic lanes on the water. This, as well as the absence of signs that clearly tell us where we are, can make navigation difficult.

To help make navigation safer, it is recommended that you carry the following for each area you plan to boat in:

the location and type of charted route:
shipping routes;
lights, buoys and marks; and
boating hazards; and
The area’s usual boating conditions such as tides, currents, ice and weather patterns
If you are operating a boat fewer than 100 gross tons, you do not have to carry these charts, documents and publications on board as long as you know:

how to plot a course;
how to determine your position; and
how to use a compass along with marine charts;
electronic navigation equipment; and
references such as tide tables;
Canada’s buoyage system, navigation lights and signals;
Notices to Mariners (Where you can find updates for your charts) and Sailing Directions.
Avoid potential danger by steering clear of rapids and currents, and be sure not to obstruct commercial navigation in commercial shipping channels.

All pleasure craft operators that navigate less than 30 meters from the shore must comply with the Vessel Restriction Operation Regulations (VORR) regarding their speed close to shore. In certain lakes and rivers, the VORR can limit the maximum horsepower of the engine. They can also limit the navigation on certain bodies of water exclusively to canoes, sailboats, etc. They could also regulate the hours for water-skiing. One must pay attention to all speed limit signs and act accordingly.

If you plan to travel in USA waters please ensure that you obtain the latest update of Homeland Security requirements as well as possibly nautical charts.
