CRIMINAL CODE OF CANADA
Canada’s Criminal Code applies to boating and makes activities like operating a boat while impaired, failing to stop at the scene of an accident and operating a boat that is not seaworthy, crimes.

Operators must recognize that certain behaviour constitutes criminal offences that are punishable (could lead to fines or possible imprisonment) under the Criminal Code while operating a pleasure craft. They are:

operating a vessel in a dangerous manner;
consumption of alcohol/drugs while operating a vessel;
operating a vessel while impaired (alcohol/drugs) or in excess of 80mg;
towing water-skiers without a spotter on board or after dark (one hour after sunset to sunrise);
failure to stop at the scene of a collision;
failure to comply with demand (demand to stop);
sending false distress signals;
operating an unseaworthy vessel;
tying up to a buoy;
operating vessel while disqualified/prohibited.
It is important to remember that all operators must comply with the demands of an enforcement officer (RCMP, provincial and municipal forces and other authorized local authorities) in a police boat. Such demands may include:

boarding the vessel;
inspecting the vessel;
monitoring your boating activities;
making sure safety requirements are met;
asking for the pleasure card and id;
asking any other pertinent questions.
Should you not comply to such requests you may be deemed to have failed to comply with demand to stop under the Criminal Code.

Remember that certain behaviours could be considered as infractions under the Criminal Code of Canada. For example; an operator should not operate in a manner dangerous to the public, failure to comply with a demand to stop, or operating a vessel while prohibited to do so under a court decision, or failure to stop at an accident. The operator should refrain from passing too close to other crafts, thus creating a wake. The operator must navigate cautiously in rough sea conditions or in foggy conditions when visibility is reduced. It is illegal to operate a boat under the influence of alcohol or drugs. Water sports and alcohol do not mix. Alcohol impairs the judgement and the competency of the operator. Furthermore, a pleasure craft operator can be indicted according to the Criminal Code if he takes people on an unseaworthy boat.
