DEFINING THE COMPONENTS OF A CRAFT
It is important for all boat operators to be able to speak the same language about the safe day-to-day operation of a vessel. This ensures consistency in the use of terminology and can save time in emergency situations and help avoid miscommunications.

It is also important to know all aspects of your vessel and where the safety equipment is located including the personal life saving appliances. The passengers must also be informed of their role and how to assume it in case of emergencies. It is also important to know all aspects of your boat as your safety on the water may depend on your knowledge of your boat, including all its parts, and its role on the water.

In particular, boaters and guests should familiarize themselves with the different flotation devices and how they operate as well as testing them (under supervision) for proper fit and operation so that if needed, they will be able to stay afloat. It is the responsibility of the operator to inform his/her guests of the above before departing. One may also refer their guests to check the manufacturer’s instructions on the device.

Remember, in emergency situations or when a situation starts deteriorating, all passengers should wear their personal saving appliance. That is why it is important that they are aware of where they are, how to use them and their role as described above.

Port means the left side of the boat when facing forward line and starboard means the right side when facing forward.

Operator means the person in charge of the manoeuvres and at the controls and responsible for the pleasure craft and the passengers on board.

The wake is the disturbed column of water around and behind the craft which is set in motion by the passage of the craft, it’s the loose or broken water left behind the vessel as it moves along. This also includes the water thrown off by the propeller.

A magnetic compass is essential for safe navigation. It helps the operator to find their way easier when fog is present or when visibility is reduced. It enables a pleasure craft operator to stay on course. Do not forget that a magnetic compass is influenced by the proximity of other metallic or electric devices or materials so that wrong readings may result. Therefore, for a compass to work properly, it must be kept away from things that could influence it, i.e. an electrical device (radio, GPS, etc…).

The bow is the forward part of the boat.

The stern is the back of the boat.

The waterline plays two important functions. First of all, it should not be under water. If this line is submerged, it means the craft is overloaded which may be dangerous. If this line is lower on one side than the other, the load of the craft is not evenly balanced; therefore, higher risk of capsizing.

The draft is the surface area of the boat that is submerged between the waterline and the bottom of the boat. It is the depth of water which a pleasure craft requires to float freely. It is necessary to remain in water that is deeper than the water draft; otherwise, the craft may run ashore.

The hull means the shell or the body of the craft excluding the mast, the sails, the riggings, the motor and the equipment.

The freeboard is the distance from the waterline to the upper deck level, measured at the lowest point of sheer where water can enter the boat or ship.

The components of a craft

