PLEASURE CRAFT LICENSING AND REGISTRATION
Under the Canada Shipping Act 2001 pleasure crafts and vessels must be identified. This allows for search and rescue personnel and other governing agencies to quickly identify your boat in case of emergency. It provides information 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. A Pleasure Craft License is different from a Vessel Registration. A Pleasure Craft License is free but a Vessel Registration has a $250 fee.

 

Pleasure Craft Licensing

All pleasure crafts equipped with a 10 horsepower engine (7.5kW) or higher must be licensed. However, it does not have to be licensed if it has a Vessel Registration. Since November 1st, 2010 new procedures have been established to license your craft. A completed application (available through Service Canada, www.servicecanada.gc.ca, form #84-0172) must be mailed to the Pleasure Craft Licensing Centre along with a proof of ownership and a signed copy of a valid piece of government-issued identification. The license is good for 10 years; you must have a copy of your Pleasure Craft License on board. Once the license number has been issued for that particular pleasure craft, it will never change. Ownership registration could change but the number follows the new owner. Any change of ownership must be completed within 90 days through Service Canada. The 90 day delay also includes any change of name and address.

The license number must be at least 7.5 cm (3 in) high and displayed on both sides of the bow of your boat, above the waterline. The numbers must be in a contrasting color to that of the hull.

 

Registration

Registration is a title system for ownership for vessels. It is similar to the title systems for land registry. Registration of your vessel will allow for approval of its name, mortgage registration and proof of ownership. However it does not have to be registered if it registered under the Small Vessel Register, used mainly for small commercial vessels. Every vessel other than a pleasure craft must be registered. Owners of pleasure crafts can register their craft but it is not mandatory (on a voluntary basis).

Registering a vessel is different than obtaining a pleasure craft license. The owner (s) must be qualified to be registered as owner (s); that is, they must be a Canadian citizen or a permanent resident within the meaning of Immigration Laws. It can also be a corporation under the laws of Canada or provincial corporate laws. The vessel must not be already registered in a foreign country. The vessel will be assigned to a Canadian port of registry. There are currently about 48000 vessels registered under that regime in Canada. A person wishing to register a vessel must complete an “Application for Registry” (form #84-0044) and submit it to the Port of Registry. They must provide various data related to the vessel (i.e. tonnage) and produce evidence of ownership. Additional details are available at www.tc.gc.ca/eng/marinesafety/oep-vesselreg-registration-menu-2311.htm.
