PERSONAL LIFESAVING APPLIANCES
A very high percentage of people that drown following an accident are not wearing a personal life saving appliance. Even if you have one on board, conditions like rough winds, waves and cold water can make it very difficult, if not impossible, to find it and put it on. Worse yet, if you unexpectedly fall into the water, the boat (with your lifejacket on board) could be too far away to reach. Therefore it is important that everyone that comes on board knows where they are located and knows how to use them.

Some of the personal lifesaving appliances are a personal flotation device (PFD) or a lifejacket. The law requires that all crafts be equipped with a PFD or lifejacket of the appropriate size for everyone on board.

PFDs must be worn snug, and lifejackets must be worn loose to allow the water to flow under the device in order to turn the body face up.

Differences between a PFD and a lifejacket:
Personal Flotation Device (PFD)

Standard

Standard Adult

Combinaison

PFD Work Suit

Enfant

Infant PFD

Paddlesport

For paddlesports

Inflatable

Inflatable PFD

a PFD is less bulky and less buoyant than a lifejacket;
a PFD may not roll a person into a position where their head is out of the water;
a PFD is preferred for active sports such as canoeing or fishing because it allows for greater movement;
Canadian-approved PFDs are available in a variety of colour.
 

Lifejacket

A lifejacket will hold the wearer in and upright position and, in most cases, roll a person from the face-down to the face-up position. Canadian-approved lifejackets must be red, orange or yellow.

It is important that a child wear a PFD that corresponds to his or her weight. A child can easily slip out of a PFD that is too large. If it is too small, the person will have difficulty getting out of the water or keeping afloat.

There are some PFDs for various activities such as kayaking, canoeing, fishing, sailing, etc. When buying a PFD choose the appropriate model for the appropriate sport, therefore take your time to choose the personal flotation device and lifejacket by keeping in mind the following:

They should be snug fitting (PFDs) and yet allow freedom of movement for the arms and legs.
They should be a proper size for the person (adult sizing for adults, child sizing for child).
They should be suitable for particular water activity.
The lifejacket should be loose fitting and provide sufficient flotation in order to turn an unconscious person face up in the water (PFDs are not designed to do so).
Many craft owners do not maintain their PFD’s. Some people use them as cushion in their crafts. Others use them as fenders to protect their craft against the dock. This could cause the foam on the inside of the PFD to break or the cover to tear and such damage will void their approved status. Some people leave their PFDs in the sun. Ultra violet rays can damage the fabric, therefore it is not recommended. It is very important to take good care of the PFD. They should be cleaned with mild soap and running water. Do not use concentrated detergents and never use petrol chemical products such as varsol, solvents, gas, etc. to wash out a grease stain. Leave it to dry naturally, but never put it in the dryer or exposed to the sun or near any direct heat. They must be stored as soon as they are dried otherwise the humidity could damage the fabric.

A Canadian approved PFDs or lifejacket is no longer approved if it has been repaired or altered in any way. The operator of a pleasure craft should store the personal flotation device and lifejackets inside the craft in a dry well-ventilated place, easy to access.

It is a good habit to periodically inspect and test your PFDs/lifejackets. To test them, here are the steps to follow:

Put on the personal flotation device or lifejacket.
Go into the water (in a supervised area) until it reaches your chest.
Bend your knees.
Let yourself float on your back; and
Be sure that the PFD or lifejacket keeps your chin above the water and that you are able to breathe comfortably.
Although you can choose between lifejackets and PFDs, keep in mind that lifejackets offer a higher level of protection. Lifesaving cushions are not approved as safety equipment on any boat.

Lifejackets come in red, orange or yellow. This makes you much easier to see in the water. Right now there are three Canadian-approved lifejacket types to choose from (Source: Transport Canada):

Safety Of Life At Sea (SOLAS) Lifejackets	Standard type Lifejackets	Small vessel Lifejackets
Performance in the Water	Best Performance – Will turn you on your back in seconds to keep your face out of the water, even if you are unconscious	Slower Performance – Will turn you on your back to keep your face out of the water, even if you are unconscious	Slowest Performance – Will turn you on your back to keep your face out of the water, even if you are unconscious, but may do so more slowly
Sizes (by weight of person)	Available in 2 sizes:
- Over 32 kg (70 lbs)
- Less than 32 kg (70 lbs)	Available in 2 sizes:
- Over 40 kg (88 lbs)
- Less than 40 kg (88 lbs)	Available in 3 sizes:
- Over 41 kg (90 lbs)
- 18 kg (40 lbs) to 41 kg (90 lbs)
- Less than 18 kg (40 lbs)
Models Available	Keyhole	Keyhole	Keyhole Vest
To find a list of all Canadian-approved lifejackets and PFDs, check out the Approved Products Catalogue Index at www.tc.gc.ca.

 

A lifejacket is the best insurance you can have – so find one that suits your needs and wear it!

If you decide to buy an inflatable PFD you need to know how it works and how to maintain it to be efficient. Find out what activities it is approved for. It is important to know that to be approved, the inflatable PFD must be worn on an open boat.If the boat is not open then you only need to wear it while you are on deck or in the cockpit.

Inflatable PFDs are NOT approved for:

anyone under 16 years old;
anyone who weighs less than 36.3 kg (80 lbs);
use on a personal watercraft; or
white-water paddling activities.
Inflatable PFDs come in two styles:
InflatableVest types can be inflated orally, manually (with a CO2 system) or automatically.

Pouch types can be orally inflated or manually inflated by pulling a toggle to activate a CO2 inflation system.

All inflatable PFD approved in Canada are equipped with a tube. If CO2 inflation mechanism does not work, simply inflate the tube through the mouth. Time to inflate the PFD is quite short but may seem long if you are not a very good swimmer or if in panic. This tube could be hard to use when you are trying to keep your head above water.

It is important to read the PFD’s User’s Guide before leaving and to try it on under supervision to become familiar with its operation. You should know how to use it before you are faced with an emergency.

 

Labels

For a lifejacket/PFD to be Canadian-approved, it must have a label that states it has been approved by:

Transport Canada;
Canadian Coast Guard;
Fisheries and Oceans Canada; or
Any combination of the above.
Lifejackets approved by the U.S. Coast Guard are not Canadian-approved. However, visitors to Canada may bring their own lifejacket to use on a pleasure craft as long as it fits and it conforms to the laws of their home country.

It is important that the correct size and proper number of PFDs/lifejackets be on board for all passengers.

 

Caring for Your Lifejacket

Treat your lifejacket like an investment and take good care of it! Lifejackets that are ripped or in poor condition are not considered approved. Follow these tips to keep yours in good condition:

check its buoyancy regularly in a pool or by wading out to waist-deep water and bending your knees to see how well you float;
make sure that straps, buckles and zippers are clean and work well;
tug on straps to make sure they are well attached and there is no sign of wear;
dry it in open air and avoid direct heat sources;
store it in a dry, well-ventilated place where it is easy to reach;
do not dry clean. Use mild soap and warm running water to clean;
never sit or kneel on your lifejacket or use it as a fender for your boat, they might get damaged and lose their approved status.
