VESSEL SAFETY EQUIPMENT
Buoyant Heaving Lines
vessel_safety1(1)

A buoyant heaving line is approved for use as long as it floats and is in good condition. It must be one full length and not a series of shorter pieces tied together. The line can only be used as safety equipment;

A buoyant heaving line should be in every type and length of craft. It is a rope that should be no less than 15 meters (50 feet) long. A float is attached at one end of the heaving line to help for the buoyancy and as a weight to help for accuracy when throwing it at a person overboard.

Boat operators should practice throwing a heaving line with an attached life ring before they need to use them in real situations. Throw either device underhand, feeding the line out of the other hand. Ensure that you securely hold on to one end of the line or that it is well tied to the boat. The life ring prevents the line from becoming tangled in the propeller and makes it easier to grasp by the person in the water. These are to be used exclusively as safety equipment in an emergency situation only.

 

Lifebuoys

vessel_safety2A lifebuoy is a life saving appliance (that should be readily accessible in case of emergency) that is thrown to a person in the water to provide buoyancy and prevent from drowning. The lifebuoys must be attached to your buoyant heaving line and is required on vessels larger than 9 meters. It must be in good condition with no tears, cracks or pieces of the material chipped away. When using the lifebuoys, the grab line must be secure and in good condition. When buying a lifebuoy, look for a Transport Canada approval stamp or label. Small vessel lifebuoys must be at least 610 mm (24”) in diameter. SOLAS lifebuoys are 762 mm (30”) in diameter. Smaller lifebuoys and horseshoe-type devices are not approved.

 

Reboarding Devices
vessel_safety3(2)
A reboarding device includes a ladder, lifting harness or other apparatus that does not include any part of the vessel’s propulsion unit and that would assist persons in gaining access to the vessel from the water. A transom ladder or swim platform ladder meets this requirement.

 

Manual Propelling Devices
vessel_safety4(2)
A manual propelling device is a device that a person can use to manually propel a boat, for example a pair of oars or paddles. An anchor can also be considered to be a manual propelling device. You simply throw it out of the boat and pull yourself with it. You must always consider the size of the boat, wind speeds and local hazards.

 

Anchors

ancre danforth
Danforth anchor
The anchor is another piece of safety equipment on a craft. There are different types of anchors and they have different characteristics. The characteristics of the waterway bottoms are the main factors that determine the type of anchor you should use. If there is a risk of bad weather, or if the pleasure craft is in trouble, a safety option is to drop the anchor. To drop anchor is a safety technique as well as an alternative to mooring at a dock when spending the night away from the marina. As a precaution, the anchor must be easily accessible. If by misfortune the engine breaks down, the craft must be anchored to proceed with repairs. The anchor prevents the boat from drifting into dangerous areas. In a storm, look for an anchorage site safe from strong winds and from other boat traffic. The site must be sufficiently deep. Make sure there is enough anchor line to keep the craft in place. There should be enough space around the boat if the wind happens to change direction.

ancre-soc-de-charrue-12
Charrue anchor
Often operators have an anchor too small to do the job. If unsure as to what to get, buy an anchor heavier than what you believe is required. It is recommended to carry 2 different types of anchors like a Danforth anchor and a Charrue anchor (see above). This will give you more flexibility when anchoring in different terrain. It is also important to have enough length of rope and chain. It is important to have a certain length of chain between the anchor and the rope. The weight of the chain improves the efficiency of the anchor and prevents premature wearing of the rope. Do not forget (make sure that the link is locked), before dropping the anchor: fasten the opposite end to the craft (bow). Many anchors have been lost because this precaution was not taken. Selection of an anchor will depend on holding power and type of bottom of underwater.

Never throw the anchor. It could reach the bottom at a bad angle and so not hold the craft. Let it drop slowly down until it touches the bottom. Then put the craft in reverse and let the rope unwind (between 5 to 7 times the water depths). Stay in reverse until the craft stops then put the gear into neutral. Never anchor small crafts from the side or the back as they could risk overturning the boat.

 

Bailers and Manual Bilge Pumps
vessel_safety6

A bailer is a container capable of removing water from a boat. It must have a minimum capacity of 750 ml and have an opening of at least 65 cm2 (10 sq.in.). It can be plastic or metal. If you have a manual bilge pump, it is necessary that the pump and hose are long enough for someone to be able to reach the hold and dump water overboard. You can use a rigid plastic bottle of four litres (useful for small open boats) to make your bailer.

Here is how to do it: Rinse the plastic bottle, screw cap, cut the bottom and cut the side of the handle – see the picture below.

 

Axe

Fire Axe-10

Depending on the size of the pleasure craft, you might be required to have an axe on board. Although any type of axe is acceptable, a spike axe, as shown is preferred. It should not be exposed to the elements (weather and water). It can also be used to cut a tow line in case of emergency

 
