VISUAL SIGNALS
Watertight Flashlights

vessel_safety7A watertight flashlight (that floats and can work in the water) is a piece of visual signal equipment required on board (see chart on the requirements depending on the type of boat and length). You must ensure that the batteries are in good working order before every trip. A watertight flashlight qualifies as navigation lights on non-powered vessels as well as on sailboats less than 7m. In an emergency, it can be used to signal for help.

 
Distress Flares

distress flaresA visual distress signal is any device designed to show that your boat is in distress; this signal would help others locate you. A wide variety of signalling devices, both pyrotechnic and non-pyrotechnic, can be carried to meet the requirements of the regulation. Visual distress signals may only be used in emergency situations.

Distress flares are used to send a distress signal.  To determine if you must carry flares and of which type in your boat. You might be exempted from carrying flares, based on the size of your boat and where you are navigating. For instance, flares are not required for a boat that is operating on a river, canal or lake in which it can never be more than one nautical mile (1.852km) from shore. Under the Criminal Code of Canada, no person in a boat shall display a visual distress signal on water, under any circumstances, except a situation where assistance is needed and there is immediate or potential danger to the persons on board.  In other words, you cannot send a false message. Although flares are potentially dangerous if misused, if you have them on board, they should be easily accessible.  They should be stored in a watertight container and in a cool, dry location.  They must be approved by Transport Canada.  You must always read the manufacturer’s instructions before use.

They are usually a one-time use; you should know how to use them before you actually have an emergency situation. Use flares only in emergency. Aerial flares should be fired at an angle and downwind. In strong winds, lower the angle to 45 degree at most.

Flares are only good for four years from the date of manufacture.  For disposal of expired flares, contact the local fire department, the police department, or even your retailer for places they can be safely disposed of. Remember that hand-held marine flares are to be used in emergency only and are to attract attention day or night and serve as a beacon for rescuer to identify your position.
Personnage avec signaux A B C D2
1- Rocket parachute 2- Multi star flare 3- Hand-held flare 4- Buoyant or hand

flare smoke signal flare

 

Rocket parachute flares: creates a single red star, reaches a height of 300m (984’), is seen from the ground or air and burns at least 40 seconds.
Multi star flares: creates two or more stars, reaches a height of 100m (328’1”), is seen from the ground or air and burns for four or five seconds.
Hand-held flares: red flame torch held in your hand and is best used to help air searchers locate you as they provide poor visibility from the ground.
Buoyant or hand smoke signal flares: creates orange smoke for three minutes and can only be used in daylight.
