CARBON MONOXIDE AWARENESS
Carbon monoxide (CO) is an invisible odourless poison. It is very difficult to detect without monitors; it kills hundreds of people every year. Organic material such as oil or gasoline produces CO when they are burned in an area with limited supply of oxygen. CO is also generated when a flame contacts a surface that is cooler than the flame’s gas ignition temperature. The most common source of carbon monoxide is incomplete fuel burning – often from motors, generators, cooking ranges, heaters and the like. People don’t realize that CO is present, since you cannot see it or smell it. You can die in minutes if you inhale large amounts of carbon monoxide. Inhaling even small amounts can cause health problems. It is important to be alert to the risk of this deadly gas.

Carbon monoxide is very dangerous because it can get into the blood stream when inhaled. Once it is there, CO interferes with the blood’s ability to send oxygen to the tissues – including the heart and the brain. In worst cases, it can cause permanent brain damage or even death. The risk is even higher for pregnant women, as the blood carries the CO to the unborn child.Get the victim into a well ventilated area, call 911/seek medical attention.

You should know the symptoms of CO poisoning. At moderate level you can get severe headaches, become dizzy, mentally confused, nauseated, or faint. You can even die if these levels persist for a long time. Low levels can cause shortness of breath, mild nausea and mild headaches, and may have a longer term effects on your health. Be aware of the symptoms as the victim may be suffering from another condition that has similar symptoms; like suffering from seasickness.

In order to prevent and avoid carbon monoxide poisoning choose appliances that vent their fuels to the outside whenever possible, have them properly installed, and maintain them according to manufacturer’s instructions. Read and follow all of the instructions that accompany any fuel burning devices and ensure that they are certified and designed for marine use. Use a CO detector and check the battery regularly.

Boaters should be aware of the circumstances when CO can build up.

Two vessels are tied to each other;
You are docked alongside a seawall;
Your load causes the bow to ride high; or
A fuel-burning appliance or engine is running while your vessel is not moving.
Help protect yourself and others from CO poisoning:

let the motor run at idle only in a well ventilated area;
heat the cabin and cook only when there is proper ventilation;
the extensions and cabin areas that have canvas awnings should be well ventilated;
engines and fuel-burning appliances must be certified or designed for marine purposes and should only be used in well ventilated areas;
use a carbon monoxide detector designed for boats and check the batteries before each departure.
 

Warning to swimmers

A swimmer can be overcome when inhaling CO and even drown within a short time. The underside of swimming platforms and the space between the pontoons of houseboats are also areas at risk.

 

Fuel-Burning Appliances

Gas emissions and leaks of propane and butane can spread rapidly in the lower parts of a boat. They are very explosive and difficult to identify. Devices that run on propane or butane pose a higher risk than those that run on gasoline.

To use the propane and butane safely:

use these devices only in a well ventilated area;
firmly attach the cooking appliances and portable heaters so that unexpected movement does not cause leakage.
secure the gas cylinders and gas tanks in an area with good ventilation;
install any fuel-burning equipment following the manufacturer’s instructions;
always supervise heaters, open flame cooking or refrigeration.
 

Ignition Protection

Every vessel that is powered by gasoline or uses propane on board is at risk of fire or explosion caused by these vapours.

Vapours (especially by gasoline) can remain behind and build up in the engine compartment of a boat, even after it’s ventilation system blowers have been running for more than 4 minutes. Gasoline vapour is flammable and poses an explosion hazard if ignited. Reducing the risk of fire or explosion depends on eliminating flammable gasses and sources of ignition. Proper maintenance, safe fuel practices, and use of approved parts will easily accomplish this safety task.

Here are a few steps a boater can take to reduce the risks of explosions:

Ensure preventive maintenance is carried out regularly.
Loose, corroded or frayed electric wires and cables can cause sparks and must be changed or repaired.
Inadequately mounted lead-acid battery can shift in the engine compartment and should be repaired or changed.
Cracked, broken and weathered fuel lines can lead to gasoline leaks into the engine compartment.
Fuel filters can rust, corrode or freeze, causing leaks of their own.
Follow safe refuelling practices (safety procedures while refuelling).
The simplest way to reduce the risk of explosion is to remove sources of heat and ignition. If an electrical component is in the engine room, fuel tank space, or space where fuel lines are, then the electrical component must be ignition protected. What does ignition protected mean? It means that a spark from the device will not ignite a fuel/air mixture in the same space. In simple words, it won’t cause an explosion.
