POINTS TO REMEMBER BEFORE HEADING OUT
It is important for boat operators to remember that negligence of their boat maintenance and inadequate preparation for boating trips can lead to unsafe boating experiences, resulting in injuries and loss of life. Boat operators must also understand the importance of demonstrating life saving equipment and providing safety instructions to their guests.

It is important to consult what is commonly known as the Pre-Departure Checklist. The goal of it is to avoid situations which could lead to emergencies.

Get to know your boat.

If you have passengers on board, it is essential to show them how to correctly wear the lifejacket or the PFD and make sure they are the appropriate size for each person. You must also inform your passengers on the location and how to use all the safety equipment. Make sure that all the basic tools and the necessary replacement parts are on board. A toolkit may include pliers, some keys, screwdrivers, a knife, an iron saw, tape, bolts, fuses and replacement light bulbs. Check your navigation lights even if you plan to come back before sunset. Check the electric pump and test the craft’s battery. If you have an onboard engine, check the oil level if you need to add more.

If your boat is equipped with a marine radio (VHF) verify that it is working by calling the marina on the 68th or 70th channel. (The 16th channel is exclusively for emergency calls).

Place safety equipment for easy access on board and let all passengers know their location and usage.

Before your departure, get into the habit of always looking at your pre-departure checklist to ensure your craft is in good working condition. This will avoid unnecessary problems later. Here are some of these things you should look for:

the weather forecast, local hazards or boating restrictions;
the general condition of the craft;
that you have an ample amount of fuel for the trip;
you have a complete First Aid Kit;
you have the safety equipment according to the regulations;
you have manual pumps available;
all navigation lights are working properly;
complete the trip-plan and leave it with a responsible person;
close the trip plan on your return;
that your drainage plug is in.
Overloading your boat with passengers or equipment, or both, is extremely dangerous for you and the people on board. If the weight is too heavy, your boat will become unstable and prone to rollover. It will be difficult to stabilize it again.

In accordance with Transport Canada Compliance Notice, the craft operator must comply with maximum security limits. These limits apply only in good weather and when the weight is evenly distributed on board. In difficult conditions, you should use common sense. Keep the load as low as possible and tie down the equipment to limit its movement.

If your boat is over 6 m (19’8”), the compliance notice will not have any recommended limits. However, if overloaded, these boats can also become unstable. You should refer to your boat manufacturer’s user guide for recommendations, you should also use your judgment when loading and operating the boat.
