COLLISION REGULATIONS
Much like the road, there are rules that govern the waterways. These are the Collision Regulations. All pleasure craft operators must respect these rules or they can be charged with severe penalties and even imprisonment. These rules apply on all Canadian bodies of water and regulate all types of crafts. The regulation states that a pleasure craft operator must take early and substantial action to keep clear of other vessels in order to avoid a collision, otherwise if the course is clear, the operator simply maintains his course and speed.

The Collision Regulations defines a power driven vessel as a vessel that is propelled by an engine, be it gasoline, diesel, steam or even electric.

A sailing vessel propelled by machinery is considered to be a power driven vessel, even if the sails are rigged. When a craft is strictly driven by the power of the wind, it is considered a sailing vessel.

Keep Watch to Avoid Collisions

 

Rules of the road

All operators of a pleasure craft must navigate safely and above all, share the waterways so as not to create situations of risk or potential danger to other boaters, swimmers, divers, wildlife and the environment in general. Every boat that navigates on a driveway or a narrow channel must stay as near to the outer limit of the channel of fairway on the starboard side as long as it is safe and convenient.

You must always maintain a constant lookout, meaning you must always look around you to see if there are hazards or other boaters giving distress signals. This is also part of the Criminal Code of Canada.

 

Steer Clear of Shipping Lanes

Some boaters do not realize the risk they take when they cross shipping lanes or pass in front of larger vessels. You must never interfere with the passage of large shipping vessels in a shipping lane. A shipping lane is the predetermined channel used by commercial vessels. You must always give way to those vessels. It is very difficult for them to change their course and they require a very long distance to come to a full stop. The crew of those vessels are standing very high above the water line which makes it very difficult for them to see smaller boats on the water. Most of the time they will navigate using sophisticated electronic equipment such as radars and GPS.

Since these vessels probably will not see you until it is too late, remember to:

Keep in mind the water and weather conditions. Use radar and radio if you have them.
Always watch for others on the water and be ready to yield to large vessels in the safest way -
Navigate in groups of other small boats when possible, to be more visible.
Stay off the water in fog or high winds.
Stay clear of docked ferries, ferries in transit, vessels in tow and working fishing vessels.
To remind you of the requirement to give way, the large ship will issue five or more short blasts. This means that the situation has reached the level of urgency and you need to clear the way.

 

Give plenty of space to tugs and other towing or pushed vessels

Tugs may tow boats with a long tow line that extends behind them. Sometimes the tow line is so long that it hangs below the water surface and is almost invisible. Never pass between a tug and the tow line. If your boat strikes the submerged tow line, it could capsize and/or can cause serious damage to your boat, thus endangering people onboard. A large number of objects being towed also leave a long trail behind them so make sure to leave the tug and the tow line a large space in each direction, move away as safely as possible since these vessels cannot manoeuvre as easily. The same safety precautions apply to pushed vessels.

All motorized crafts must take early and substantial action to stay clear of sailing crafts or active pleasure fishing crafts, paddle craft, canoes and kayaks. However,pleasure crafts that practice line or fly-fishing must also abide by the same regulations as those of other power driven vessels. A sailboat operator must take early and substantial action to keep clear of a pleasure craft on which the passengers are fishing.

An active net-fishing craft is not manoeuvrable.

In addition, an operator must take into consideration other important issues while encountering other vessels.

 

Action by Stand-on vessel

Where one of two vessels is to keep out of the way, the other shall keep her course and speed. The latter vessel may however take action to avoid collision by her manoeuvre alone, as soon as it becomes apparent to her that the vessel required to keep out of the way is not taking appropriate action in compliance with these rules.

 

Action by Give-way vessel

Give-way vessel means a vessel that is required by these Regulations to keep out of the way of another vessel.

Every vessel which is directed to keep out of the way of another vessel shall, so far as possible take early and substantial action to keep well clear.

Here are some of the rules that apply to sailboats:

 

Rules of the road

ang_texte_colllisionregulation(1)[1]

When each sailing vessel has the wind on a different side, the vessel that has the wind on its port (left) side must keep out of the way of the other. As you can see above, vessel A keeps clear of vessel B.

If a sailing vessel has the wind on its port side and the operator is not sure if the other vessel has the wind on its port or starboard (right) side, the first boat must keep out of the way of the other.

ang_texte_colllisionregulation2(2)[1]

When both sailing vessels have the wind on the same side, the vessel to windward* must keep out of the way of the vessel to leeward. As you can see above, vessel B keeps clear of vessel A.

The windward side is opposite to the side that carries the mainsail or, in the case of a square-rigged vessel, the side opposite to the side that carries the largest fore-and-aft sail.

A craft that overtakes another craft must take early and substantial action to keep clear of the other craft in front of it. (see below)

ang_texte_colllisionregulation3[1]

Two crafts that come face to face must both steer to their respective starboard side in order to avoid a collision (see below).

ang_texte_colllisionregulation4[1]

The operator who sees other power driven vessels on his starboard side, and who must cross their path thus risking collision, must manoeuvre and take early and substantial action to keep clear of the craft and, if possible, avoid crossing ahead of the other vessel.

ang_texte_colllisionregulation5[1]

Here is an example. The color showing the right of way is green and the color blocking the right of way is red. On a craft, always ask yourself, «Which side of the craft am I going to cross? Will I cause a collision if we change direction? If I see the red side (port), I must keep clear of the other craft. On the contrary, if I see the green side (starboard), then I have the right of way and even then I must keep my course and speed».
