LOCAL HAZARDS
There are various local risks and hazards on each body of water and each have their own characteristics.
Rapids are a hazard because of the speed of the current that prevents you from being able to properly manoeuvre your craft. Rapids are usually shallow water with large rocks scattered beneath the surface of the water. If you hit a rock, the boat or the propeller could be damaged. Low- head dams, white water and bridges can also impede the operation of a pleasure craft. If navigating a sailboat, it is important to properly evaluate the space between the top of the mast and overhead electric cables as many pleasure craft operators have been electrocuted because of carelessness.

You must always be ready for all unforeseen eventualities. You must also ensure that your boat and all its equipment are in good condition and operate according to standards. You must also:

carry navigation charts of the area where you are navigating so that you are aware of the location of raised obstacles, bridges and underwater cables;
learn how to read and interpret navigation charts – consulting tide tables and other documentation will also help you learn more about water levels, periods of low tide and high slack, and the direction of the current;
always keep clear of swimming areas – even boats without engine such as canoes and kayaks can cause accidents and injure swimmers;
avoid navigating too close to shore as this can damage the banks by creating erosion;
prior to navigating in an area where you are not familiar, it is strongly recommended that you contact the area residents who are familiar with the waters, especially if you are in uncharted areas. They may be able to identify local hazards such as shallow areas or rapids and white water, and to describe the local wind conditions, currents and areas where high waves are easily formed.
Underwater cables also represent danger. When the anchor is dropped, it can get caught on the underwater cable and potentially cause an electrocution. A craft can also be overturned while trying to haul up an anchor that is caught on the cables. Marine charts point out underwater cables. There are often signs set in the water that mark the presence of these underwater cables.

Lakes surrounded by hills are susceptible to sudden wind changes. There can be a rapid change in wind speed and direction without warning, thus, causing a craft to become unstable and possibly overturn.

Areas where tides and different currents exist, all add to the complexity of navigation, they must not be overlooked.

When the tide is in the opposite direction of the wind, you can face ripples of the waves which may overturn a craft, even if the wind is light. If the amplitude of the tide is not known when a craft is anchored, you could be surprised to find the craft completely out of the water when the tide recedes.

When the water is shallow and the intensity of the wind increases, waves can become very large and will break. You must always be alert to wind conditions and always maintain a constant watch on weather patterns and changes.
