SPECIAL BUOYS
There are many special buoys:

A yellow, cautionary buoy indicates dangers or hazards such as firing ranges, race courses, seaplane bases, traffic separations, underwater structures or areas where there are no through channels. It displays identification letter(s). If it has a top mark, it is a single yellow «X».

The keep out buoy marks an area where boats are prohibited. These buoys are white with an orange diamond with a cross of the same color on the two opposite sides on the inside and two orange bands over and below the diamond.

The control buoy marks an area where boats are also restricted. The buoy is white, with an orange open-faced circle on two opposite sides and two orange horizontal bands, one above and one below the circles. A number or a symbol inside the circle indicates the nature of the restriction in effect.

The hazard buoy marks random hazards such as rocks and shoals. It is white with an orange diamond at the center of two opposite sides and has a band above and below the diamond. Information regarding the hazard is illustrated inside the diamond.

The information buoy displays, by words or symbols, information of interest to the craft operator. It is white with an orange open-faced square symbol on two opposite sides and two orange horizontal bands, one above and one below the square symbol.

The swimming buoy marks the perimeter of a swimming area.

The diving buoy marks an area where diving activities are in progress and are not usually shown on charts.

The blue and white flag (flag A) of the International Code of Signals is to be displayed on the diving boats. The buoy is a red flag with a white diagonal line across it and it indicates the location where the divers are under the water. This flag can be seen floating on the water or sometimes it can be attached to the diver so that when the diver moves the flag will follow. You should be careful and prudent to ensure that you stay outside a radius of 100 m (328 ft) of their flag. If you see one of these two flags, stay outside a radius of at least 100 m (328 ft). If you cannot keep such a large distance, slow down as much as possible, move cautiously and stay away from the boat and the diving area in order to avoid any under water collisions between the engine’s propeller (s) and the diver(s).

Remember: keep your distance from divers below the surface
