CAPSIZING
The majority of incidents where a boat capsized are caused by mistakes from the operator, such as changing the boat’s direction too quickly while using excessive speed. Another reason would when they anchor the boat inappropriately or against the current or during strong winds, thus rendering the boat unstable. However, it is not always due to errors by the operator. The weather can change quickly, winds can pick up, sudden thunderstorms occur seemingly out of nowhere. You might start a boating expedition early in the morning, the weather is nice, the water is calm, but then hours later everything can change. If the operator is not experienced to face these sudden changes, this is when incidents can happen and worsen because of that. Always keep in mind that the operator is ALWAYS responsible for the persons on board. His or her decision to go boating could unfortunately turn things around very quickly.

As mentioned before, boats capsize because they become unstable. A well designed boat will resist capsizing in severe weather if it is properly operated. There are many things to keep in mind to reduce the risk of capsizing:

Check the weather forecast before departure. Be aware of external forces such as wind, waves, water depth and the period of the year.
Don’t overload the pleasure craft. Be aware of your boat capabilities and the fact that adding weight into the boat will affect the available free board (distance between the water and the working deck of the boat). If it is overloaded, the free board will be reduced which could cause the water to go overboard.
Try to operate you pleasure craft with fuel tanks and water ballasts filled as much as possible. This reduces the possibility of weight shifting, thus reducing the boat’s stability.
Keep all your hatches, doors and windows closed. This will prevent water from entering the lower parts of the boat. Checking the conditions of the seals and gaskets will also prevent water from entering.
Adjust your course and speed accordingly in order to minimize the boat’s motion and its stability.
Avoid sharp or high speed turns when loss of stability is possible.
There are always warning signs that will tell you if your boat becomes unstable and if you run a risk of capsizing, swamping or sinking. Perform visual checks of your boat. If it lists on one side, it could mean it is taking water or if the trim is not adjusted properly it could take in water. As simple as it may seem, check if the drain plug at the stern is fitted properly. Check if the cargo has shifted during your trip. On larger boats, make sure the bilge level alarms are operational. Sometimes if the bilge pump is operating at unusual frequencies, it could be a sign that the boat is taking in water. These warning signs, along with preventive maintenance and efforts will greatly reduce the risk of instability and possibly save many lives.

If the boat capsizes, everybody should stay close to the pleasure craft; it is easier to locate a boat and the people close to it instead of trying to locate people with their heads sticking out of the water scattered everywhere. Everybody should try to climb up on the capsized craft as high as possible. This could prevent hypothermia. If the boat has actually sunk, then everybody should stay close together and ensure that everybody is accounted for.
