NAVIGATING RESPONSIBILITY
The rules state:

Stay clear of swimmers, paddle craft, wildlife and adjacent private properties;
When you start out, the speed of the craft must be adjusted so that the wake and the wave disturbance created do not injure other people, erode the shoreline or do damage to property;
Follow collision regulations.
Use courtesy and common sense so as not to create a hazard, a threat, a stress or an irritant to passengers, to others nearby, to the environment or to wildlife.
The operator of a pleasure craft should never move a sign in the water by mooring the craft to a sign or a buoy used for navigation purposes. He must never wilfully remove or conceal a buoy or other sea-mark used for navigation purposes. If an operator moors his craft to a channel buoy, charges could be brought against him. The reason is very simple. If the craft is large and hides the buoy, other pleasure craft operators will not be able to see it and risk running their craft aground or they may take the wrong route. The weight of the craft could also move the buoy.

The operator of a pleasure craft must never send a false distress call. For example, sending a MAY DAY, if not in a life-threatening situation may lead to a fine, under the Criminal Code of Canada.

A responsible pleasure craft operator (as well as its passenger(s)) must be attentive to distress signals from other craft operators at all times and shall render assistance. Use all your senses, look and listen attentively, always maintain a constant lookout.

Be Aware and Polite
Be courteous and polite when you navigate on the water. Boating accidents happen very quickly and mostly occur when the operator has misjudged the distance or exceeds a safe speed. Therefore, stay away from other boats, swimmers, do not cut in front of another boat or jump the wake. Boating accidents involving friends or family members are even more dramatic if you are the driver.

Reduce Engine Noise
Every boat equipped with a motor other than a stock (unmodified) outboard engine must have a muffler and must be used while operating within five (5) nautical miles (9.26 km) of shore.

This is not applicable if your boat was built before January 1, 1960, or if you are in an official competition or in formal training or final preparation for an official competition.
