NAVIGATION LIGHT SIGNALS
Navigation Lights and Shape Requirements and Options by Boat Type and Length
Navigation lights are required on your vessel if you are operating it at night or in restricted visibility. Night time is considered after sunset and before sunrise. Restricted visibility could also be during the day, for instance in heavy fog or even bad weather, like rainfall even snowfall. The important thing to remember is that you must been seen by other boaters from all around; the same is true for yourself: you must also see other boaters all around you. Navigation lights fall under two regulations. First, under the Small Vessel Regulations (SVR), which specifies the safety equipment required on board based on the type and size of the boat. The SVR also stipulates that all equipment, including navigation lights, must be in good working order and be checked before every trip. It also falls under the Collision Regulations, which describes how and when to use navigation lights. By looking at the navigation lights, operators must be able to first recognize that there are other boats navigating in the area and in which direction they are going so as to avoid a collision. It could also help determine if it is a power driven boat or a sailboat; it also determines if the boat is moving or is anchored. Their specific colour identification, their meaning and the appropriate action to take when approaching a vessel showing navigation lights are all part of operating a boat safely and in shared waterways. Everyone must be aware of how to use them. Sharing the waterways responsibly and safely is a fundamental part of boating safety.

Under the collision Regulation (Rule 22) the lights showing on your vessel must have a minimum range of visibility. The range is based on the length of the vessel.

Large ships, fishing vessels, tugboats pulling barges and official government (police) boats are equipped with additional lights to identify their specific type of vessel.

Here is a list of the lights found on vessels and their corresponding color:

All-round light: a light showing an unbroken light over an arc of the horizon of 360 degrees.

Side lights: a green light on the starboard side and a red light on the port side, near the bow and each showing an unbroken light over an arc of the horizon of 112.5 degrees; the sidelights may be combined with one lantern installed in front (or bow) of the vessel.

Stern light: a white light placed as close as possible at the stern, showing an unbroken light over an arc of the horizon of 135 degrees.

Masthead light:a white light placed over the fore and aft centreline of the vessel.

Blue flashing light: Used by any government vessels and or operated by law enforcements; they are identified by an all-around blue flashing light when they are engaged in duties in Canadian waters.

Yellow light:used when the vessel is engaged in towing operations; same characteristics as a stern light

Special flashing light: a yellow light placed at the forward end of a towing vessel or vessel being towed

Here is a brief description of the requirements and different options for such lights and shapes based on the type ans length of your boat:

The color of the light on the other craft determines who has priority. Except for three types of pleasure crafts, all must have side lights and stern lights. On the starboard (right side), there is an unbroken green light. On the port side (left) there is an unbroken red light. The stern light is an all around (360 degrees) white light placed as close as possible to the stern.

In the event that the boat (or a sailboat) has a cabin or is bigger in size and the stern light is not seen from all around, we split that stern light in two. We then have a stern light showing a light with an arc of 135 degrees and a second light on the fore and aft of the pleasure craft (top of the mast) , the mast headlight, showing an arc of 225 degrees. The sum of the two is 360 degrees, meaning that the boat is seen from all around.

Bateau avec lumière A

Bateau avec lumière A_1

Bateau avec lumière B_1

If a power driven pleasure craft is operated after sunset or before sunrise, or even in periods of low visibility (i.e. fog) it must exhibit the required navigations lights. They must be seen from all around.

The navigation lights will also determine in what direction the boat is going or if the boat is moored. Most importantly, it will determine who has the right of way when approaching another boat. All the boats will show their sidelights and either their stern light or a combination of stern light / mast headlight. If you see a red side light from the other boat, this means you do not have the right of way; you must stay clear of the other boat. That other boat will then see your green side light, meaning he has the right of way. If you do not follow these simple rules a collision will occur, putting all the persons on board at risk.

The Collisions Regulations require that all-round lights on all horizons (unbroken light on an arc of 360 degrees)be lit from sunset to sunrise and in reduced visibility(fogorclouds).

Motor boats of less than 12 meters underway from sunset to sunrise must exhibit sidelights and either an all-round white light or a masthead light and a stern light.

Sailboats
A sailboat is also required to exhibit sidelights and a sternlight. However, if the sailboat is less than 20 meters these three lights may be combined in one light fixture installed at or near the top of the mast. Another option for sailboats is to install two all-round lights at or near the top of the mast, the upper one red and the lower one green. These lights are combined with the regular sidelights and the sternlight but not in a combined light fixture.

A sailboat of less than 7 meters in length, underway from sunset to sunrise must exhibit, if possible, side lights and a sternlight. If the operator does not have these, he or she must have at hand an electric torch or lighted lantern showing a white light in order to avoid collision. A watertight flashlight qualifies as navigation light on non-powered vessels (rowboats and canoes) as well as on sailboats less than 7m. In an emergency, it can also be used to signal for help.

Fishing vessels

cargot1

cargo2

Gros cargo C

cargot4

Anchored, after sunset and before sunrise, showing an all-round white light

Anchored, during daylight, displaying a black ball

While under way, at night with all-round lights sidelights and one all-round red light

While under way during daylight, diplaying proper equipment

Fishing vessel engaged in trawling, two all-round lights in a vertical line, the upper green and the lower white

Anchored Vessels
The operator of a pleasure craft of less than 50 meters that is anchored must exhibit in the forward area, an all-round white light or one ball depending on the time of day and visibility. A pleasure craft less than 7 metres that is not anchored in or near narrow channel or where other vessels normally navigate is not required to exhibit anchor lights.

2 bateau (voilier et towing)2

Towing Vessels
A towing vessel engaged in towing must exhibit in addition to sidelights and a stern light, a flashing yellow light mounted above the stern light and two masthead lights forward in a vertical line, (if more than 200 m long, 3 masthead lights).

Another towing situation a when a pleasure craft is towing another pleasure craft. In addition to the regular navigation lights, when a vessel not normally engaged in towing operations is engaged in towing another vessel in distress or otherwise in need of assistance it shall take all possible measures to indicate the nature of the relationship between the towing vessel and the vessel being towed in particular, by illuminating the tow-line.
Bateau avec pont(2)
Pushing Vessels and Vessels Being Pushed
A special yellow flashing light shall be placed at the forward end of a towing vessel or vessel being pushed. The vessel engaged in pushing should have sidelights, stern light and two masthead lights. The vessel being pushed should have sidelights at the forward end. When both vessels are rigidly connected in a composite unit, the lights are the same as a power-driven vessel.

Towing Vessels pushing a <em title=Boat" width="450" height="144" class="alignleft size-full wp-image-752" />
Passive Radar Reflectors
A passive radar reflector can enhance your safety on the water, but only if it is big enough and well placed on your boat. Reflectors help larger vessels to see small boats on their radar screens, which is sometimes the only way that they will be able to spot you while navigating in or close to shipping lanes.

When buying a reflector, there is no substitute for size – so buy one that will be efficient for your boat. Height is also very important, so keep this in mind also. A passive radar reflector is only efficient if it is installed at least 4 m (13’1”) above the water level.
