RECOVERING A PERSON OVERBOARD
The most common causes of on-water incidents and fatalities are due to a collision with other vessels, capsizing and people falling overboard because they were standing at the side of the boat. There are many other causes such as reckless driving, excessive speed, operator inattention, and lack of experience of the operator. Every boating fatality and reported incidents are investigated and it was determined that most of these accidents could have been prevented, sometimes with just basic boating knowledge from the operator. The majority of the victims falling overboard and drowning were not wearing a personal flotation device. Alcohol was shown to be involved in near 40% of boating fatalities. Statistics also show that 25% of people who fall overboard and 40% of people involved in their boat capsizing have drowned.

Getting in and out of a boat can sometimes be tricky and can create additional risks of falling overboard. When getting into a boat, make sure you are starting from a stable position; remember you are going into a boat that is probably not as stable as solid ground since it floats on water. Always shift and adjust your weight and your body position accordingly, and try to hold on to something stable, like a dockside post, a cable on a ramp post or even another person. In the event you do fall into the water and the water is deep enough, swim to the nearest place where you can get out of the water easily, either by simply walking or using equipment, such as a ladder fixed to the dock, a re boarding device or a swimming platform, if these are already installed on the boat. Depending on the time of the year, the water might be cold and you might want to get out of the water as soon as possible in order to prevent hypothermia.

People can fall overboard while the boat is moving. This could happen for instance if the boat hits a wave at a wrong angle, then the weight of a person is thrown off balance and they can be ejected from their seat. When people are boarding a pleasure craft, the operator (who is responsible for the people on board) should always decide everybody’s seating position so as to distribute all the weight evenly, thus stabilizing both the people and the material on board. When the boat is moving, passengers should always stay seated. This will also maintain a low centre of gravity, which helps to stabilize the boat. Passengers should never stand in a moving boat as it might render it unstable. You should have equipment on board to help a person who has fallen in the water, back in the boat. Know your water depth to avoid damage to the propeller, turn off engine when retrieving a person from the water.

In the event of a person falling overboard, alert everyone immediately. Proceed very cautiously taking the following steps, when possible:

slow down, stop if possible and throw a floating object to help him out (or to indicate where the person has sunk); When the person is being retrieved from the water, the engine should be turned off; this could prevent further emergencies, like the person being hit by the propeller.
if you have other passengers on board, ask them to maintain eye contact with the person who fell overboard. Otherwise, if the operator is alone in the boat he or she must operate the boat and maintain eye contact. Emergency situations can happen very quickly, we must always be prepared to react and maintain control.
steer your boat with care while keeping the person who has fallen in your field of vision to recover the person in a safe manner;
throw the person a buoyant heaving line or lifebuoy attached to the boat and pull the person up on the windward side. Please note that if the vertical height to climb back aboard the boat from the water (free board) is more than 0.5 m (1 ft 8 in), you are required under the Small Vessel Regulations to have a re boarding device on the boat, such as a ladder.
Boaters should be familiar of different methods to recover someone who has fallen overboard. They should also be able to decide which method to use based on the conditions of both the water and the person overboard. Safety is always the most important issue, even after the emergency has occurred.
