SURVIVING IN COLD WATER AND HYPOTHERMIA
Many of the fatal boating accidents occur in the months when the water is cold (out of season). Many hunters for instance will navigate on the waters to get to their hunting grounds. Cold-water shock occurs when you are suddenly plunged in water that is 15 degrees Celsius and below. Most people do not understand the dangers and do not know how to deal with it. Canada’s cold waters are particularly dangerous should you fall in them accidentally.

The first hazards to contend with are panic and shock. The initial shock can place severe strain on the body; it could paralyze your muscles instantly and in some cases, even produce instant cardiac arrest. Wearing a life jacket during this phase is critically important to keep you afloat and breathing.

During the first minute of exposure, survivors of cold water accidents have reported the breath taken out of them on the first impact with the water. Should your face be in the water during that first involuntary gasp of breath, you may well be inhaling water rather than air. Cold water shock will pass in about 1 minute. During that time concentrate on avoiding panic and getting control of your breathing. Submersion in cold water can quickly numb the extremities to the point of uselessness. Cold hands cannot fasten the strap of the lifejacket, grasp a thrown rescue line, or hold onto an overturned boat. Within minutes severe pain will cloud rational thoughts. Finally hypothermia (exposure) sets in, and without rescue and proper first aid treatment, unconsciousness and death will follow.

Cold water robs the body of heat 32 times faster than cold air. If you should fall into the water, all efforts should be given to getting out of the water by the fastest means possible. It is very important here, when navigating in cold water, that everyone should wear their PFD/lifejacket, this may save their life. If possible wear an immersion suit or an anti-exposure suit. These are usually a one-piece suit that acts both as a jacket to keep you warm and as a personal floatation device. They must follow the same criteria as other PFDs: they must be Canadian approved.

Should you find yourself in the water, avoid panic. Air trapped in clothing can provide buoyancy as long as you remain still in the water. Swimming or treading water will greatly increase heat loss and can shorten survival time by more than 50%. The major body heat loss areas are the head, the neck, armpits, chest and groin. If you are not alone, huddle together or in a group facing each other to maintain body heat.

Hypothermia

Treatment for hypothermia depends on the condition of the person. Mild hypothermia victims who show the only symptoms of shivering and are capable of rational conversation may only require removal of wet clothes and replacement of dry clothes and blankets.

In more severe cases where the victim is semi-conscious, immediate steps must be taken to begin the re-warming process. Remove clothing only if it can be done with a minimum of movement to the victim’s body. Do not massage the extremities. Lay the semi-conscious person face up, with the head slightly lowered, unless vomiting occurs. The head down position allows more blood to flow to the brain. A first aid course is obviously helpful when anyone is faced with emergency situations. Consult organizations in your community that offer such programs.

Never give alcohol or hot drinks such as coffee, tea or cocoa (these are cardiac stimulants) to a hypothermia victim.

Most people recovered in cold water (near drowning) show typical hypothermia symptoms.

Shivering, slurred speech and semi-consciousness.
Cyanotic (blue) skin coloration.
Breathing difficulty (hyperventilation)
Muscle spasm
Loss of body movement.
Pupils fully dilated (open).
Become unconscious.
Increased heart rate and blood pressure
Numerous children have been brought up from freezing water after 30 minutes and have been successfully resuscitated.

The major lesson learned is very simple. It is not enough to carry a PFD/lifejacket on your boat. Once in the water you may not be able to swim the 2 or 3 meters necessary to find it. And once you have reached it, you may not have the dexterity to put it on.

The only effective prevention is to wear a PFD/lifejacket at all times where there is a risk of falling overboard or being ejected from the small boat. Once you have entered the water it is too late – the psychological and neurological response of your body to the sudden cold may make it impossible to you to keep your airway above water.

Things to do that may help you survive in cold water:

Wear your PFD/lifejacket; some PFD’s come as a one-piece suit commonly used by ice fishermen.
Climb onto a nearby floating object to get as much of your body out or above the water as possible.
Cross your arms tightly against your chest and draw your knees close to them to help you keep your body heat.
Huddle with others with chests close together, arms around mid-lower back, and legs intertwine.
You can protect yourself by wearing multiple layers of dry clothing and a water or windproof outer layer under a lifejacket. Other equipment that can offer extra protection against hypothermia could include:

Floater or survival suits: a full nose-to-toes lifejacket
Anti-exposure work suits: a lifejacket with a thermal protection rating
Dry suits: to be used with a lifejacket and a thermal liner
Wet suits: to be used with a lifejacket – trap and heat water against the body
Immersion suits: to be used in extreme conditions when abandoning a vessel
Remember to always make that your safety equipment is adequate for navigation in cold water and that everybody on board know how to operate that equipment.
