THE ENVIRONMENT CONCERNS US ALL
Respect and Protect Canada’s Waterways
Canada’s lakes, rivers and coastal waters are ours to share, so do your part to take good care of them. It is against the law to pollute the water with things like fuel, oil, garbage, hydrocarbons, anti-freeze, other toxics substance such as cleaners and untreated sewage in inland waters.

Canada has laws that protect our waterways and shorelines, and some of them apply to pleasure crafts. It is your responsibility to make sure you know and obey the laws wherever you go boating. If you cause water pollution by accident, it’s important that you report the event to the government immediately.

Preventing Pollution in our Waterways
The Regulations for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships and for Dangerous Chemicals address major risks to the health of our waterways and shorelines such as sewage, garbage and hydrocarbons. Sewage contains, among other things, human or animal body waste, drainage and other waste from toilets.

These regulations prohibit the use of freestanding portable toilets. They also require that boats fitted with toilets be equipped with either a holding tank or a marine sanitation device. If your boat was built before May 3, 2007, you must comply with these regulations by May 3, 2012. Boats built on or after May 3, 2007, must comply immediately.

Holding Tanks and Marine Sanitation Devices
Choose a holding tank or a marine sanitation device that works for you. A holding tank is only used to collect and store sewage or sewage sludge and must be emptied at approved pump-out facilities on dry land only. Be sure to follow pumping instructions and avoid using disinfectants, as they may harm the environment. A marine sanitation device is designed to receive and treat sewage on board. Only sewage treated with a marine sanitation device that meets the standards set out in the regulations may be discharged in inland waters.

Reducing Pollution from Bilges
Oil, fuel, anti-freeze and transmission fluid are a few examples of pollutants that harm the environment when pumped overboard – usually by automatic bilge pumps. Bilge cleaners, even the biodegradable ones, just break down the oil into tiny, less visible droplets. Absorbent bilge cloths are very useful because they are designed to absorb petroleum products and repel water. Here are a few tips to help keep bilge pollution at a minimum:

Turn off automatic bilge pumps. Only use them when needed and when the bilge contains only water.

Use towels or bilge cloths to absorb oils, fuel, and antifreeze and transmission fluid. Dispose of used towels or bilge cloths in an approved garbage container.

Spread of invasive species
By doing your part in helping to protect Canada’s waterways, boat operators must be concerned of the possible spread of invasive species. You must keep your hull clean especially if you operate your boat in different lakes, rivers, major waterways and tow it overland between usages. Rinsing or cleaning your hull after use or before entering new waters will help remove spores and other organisms. Certain municipalities have adopted severe policies regarding this matter, be vigilant when putting boats in their waterways.

Reading Signs based on the Vessel Operation Restriction Regulations (VORR)
The signs described under the Vessel Operation Restriction Regulations come in five shapes. The colour of the frame is orange and it is recognized internationally. When part of a sign has a green border, a special condition applies to the restriction. The symbol tells you the type of restriction that it applies to. If the sign is arrow-shaped, the restriction applies in the direction of the arrow. Know what these signs mean.

Note: Certain provinces, have adopted shoreline speed restrictions; boaters should refer to Vessel Operation Regulations (VORR) at //www.tc.gc.ca/eng/marinesafety/tp-tp14799-vessel-restrictions-2240.htmfor detailed information on speed restrictions.

1(1)

No power vessels

2(1)

No internal combustion or steam engine permitted

3(1)

Power limit

4(1)

No skiing

5

Standardized speed limit (normally 5, 10, 25, 40, 55)

6

No regatta

7

No Vessels

8

No power driven vessels in the direction indicated by the arrow

11

Combined sign (no skiing and speed limit)

9

No skiing north of the sign

10

No power vessels between the hours and days in red
